** This document is an ASCII formatted version of the printed
report summary.  The page numbers and footnotes may appear
differently than in the printed version.  The printed version may
also contain charts which are not reproduced in this electronic
version. To obtain a printed copy of the report, contact the HHS
OIG Public Affairs Office at 202-619-1142**

FOREWORD

I am pleased to present this semiannual report of the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG)
describing our accomplishments during the 6-month period ending
March 31, 1995.

In the first half of Fiscal Year (FY) 1995, we have been part of
several pivotal changes.  As of March 31, 1995, the Social Security
Administration (SSA) became an independent agency with its own OIG
formed of staff from the HHS OIG.  In the next reporting period,
SSA OIG will report its own accomplishments.  Under the provisions
of the Social Security Independence and Program Improvements Act of
1994, and at the request of Commissioner Shirley Chater, (while
continuing as HHS Inspector General) I will serve as interim
Inspector General of SSA until an Inspector General is nominated
and confirmed.  It is a pleasure to work with Commissioner Chater
and her excellent staff, and I commend all of the outstanding
accomplishments by both HHS and SSA staff in the transition to an
independent SSA.

Within HHS OIG, we are continuing to streamline our operations
while maintaining our vigorous pursuit of fraud, waste and abuse. 
As examples of our streamlining efforts, we completed early-out and
buyout programs targeted at reducing management positions (Senior
Executive Service through General Schedule-13) and closed 17 out of
65 field offices.  The OIG also reduced administrative costs by
increasing teleconferencing to conduct audit conferences and report
reviews, making more efficient use of other electronic
communications, pursuing more cost-effective in-house training and
redesigning basic work processes.

Under Secretary Shalala's leadership, we have launched a major
program integrity project, Operation Restore Trust, with the Health
Care Financing Administration, Administration on Aging, Department
of Justice, State Medicaid Fraud Control Units and others working
against health care fraud.  Its purpose is to model an approach for
attacking health care fraud through focused intergovernmental
teams.  We will target our initial partnership efforts to
investigations, audits, evaluations and administrative sanctions in
home health agencies and nursing homes, two industries we have
identified as particularly vulnerable to fraud and abuse.  The
ultimate objective is to protect the integrity, quality and access
of our health care programs.

These innovations and cost-cutting efforts underscore OIG's record
as a good investment, returning $80 in savings for each dollar
invested in it in FY 1994 or an average of $6.4 million per OIG
employee.  With the support of the Department and the Congress, we
will continue to fulfill our mission and strengthen the
Department's ability to serve the public.  


June Gibbs Brown
Inspector General

HIGHLIGHTS

In this first half of Fiscal Year 1995, the Office of Inspector
General (OIG) has undertaken several major initiatives to protect
the integrity of departmental operations and programs and the
health and well-being of the beneficiaries served by those
programs.  Some of OIG's most significant accomplishments during
this period are identified below.

The OIG and the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)
initiated a project to develop an innovative, multidiscipline
Federal and State approach to preventing and detecting fraud in
home health agencies and nursing homes in five States.  (See page
23)

Other initiatives include:

Reducing Unnecessary Spending:
* Joint work by OIG and HCFA is resulting in annual savings of $8
million and recovery of $219 million in overpayments caused by
transfers between prospective payment system hospitals that were
erroneously reported and paid as discharges.  (See page 5)

* The OIG found that, in 1992, $10.8 million in improper payments
were made on behalf of Medicare beneficiaries in nursing homes for
durable medical equipment.  (See page 21)

* Based on its finding that Federal employees and retirees owe the
Social Security Administration (SSA) $15.2 million, OIG recommended
that SSA submit a legislative proposal to implement Federal salary
offset for overpayments.  (See page 28)

Preventing and Detecting Fraud and Abuse:
* New York State agreed to pay almost $27 million to settle charges
of false claims to the Federal Government.  (See page 65)

* A Michigan carrier agreed to pay $27.6 million to settle a qui
tam suit initiated by a former employee and $24 million to settle
charges of violating Medicare secondary payer laws.  (See page 16)

* The OIG found that over 75 percent of the reimbursement claims
filed by a home health agency were inappropriate, resulting in an
overpayment of $25.9 million.  (See page 6)

* The OIG found that questionable billing practices may account for
nearly half of the Medicare allowances for incontinence supplies in
1993.  (See page 20)

* A woman who owned two vascular testing clinics and a durable
medical equipment company in Florida and three of her employees
were given lengthy jail sentences and ordered to repay more than
$2.2 million for paying individuals to submit to tests and falsely
billing Medicare and Medicaid.  (See page 8)

* A Massachusetts carrier paid $2.75 million in settlement for
submitting false Medicare reports for a number of New England
States.  (See page 16)

* A Texas man and his wife were sentenced to prison for 48 and 30
months, respectively, for a scheme in which he faked his own death
so she could collect insurance and Social Security survivors
benefits.  (See page 31)

* An administrative law judge determined that a California
oncologist should be permanently excluded from participation in the
Medicare and State health care programs.  (See page 15)

* An Alaska physician was excluded for 15 years for sexual assaults
he committed during physical examinations of his patients.  (See
page 14)

Identifying Systemic Management Problems:
* The OIG presented five alternative options to improve the system
for reimbursement of administrative costs in the Medicaid, Aid to
Families with Dependent Children and Food Stamp programs, some of
which could save hundreds of millions of dollars.  (See page 54)

* Audits by OIG in five States identified numerous instances where
child care facilities did not comply with States' health and safety
standards.  The OIG recommended that the Administration for
Children and Families (ACF) provide States' identified best
practices to improve health and safety conditions in the Nation's
child care programs.  (See page 52)

* After OIG found that 75 percent of all hospitals in the United
States had never reported an adverse action taken against
practitioners, the Public Health Service (PHS) and HCFA agreed to
work together to encourage the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations to devote greater attention to hospital
compliance with the National Practitioner Data Bank law.  (See page
47)

* As an upfront control over the quality of contract bids, OIG
recommended that HCFA include, in its requests for bids from peer
review organizations, OIG's recently issued Proposal Guidance Book
that instructs bidders on the documentation needed to support
proposed costs.  (See page 7)

Promoting Improved Service Delivery:
* In an inspection on oxygen concentrator services, OIG found that
Medicare policies have contributed to a wide variation in these
services provided to beneficiaries, and that many of the services
provided were not endorsed by national organizations.  (See page
20)

* The OIG determined that the use of competitive contracts or
negotiated agreements to purchase consultative examinations could
result in considerable savings for SSA, and improve the timeliness
and quality of these examinations.  (See page 36)

* In response to a PHS request, OIG determined that the Office of
Research Integrity (ORI) is properly staffed and identified
opportunities for ORI to improve its operations by making better
use of existing staff.  (See page 46)

* The OIG found that the Administration on Aging and ACF could take
advantage of the benefits of intergenerational activities by
encouraging the voluntary colocation of programs, such as Head
Start and senior centers.  (See page 58)

Developing and Assessing Performance Measures:
* Upon finding that there was considerable confusion as to
congressional intent regarding the Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) disability program for children, particularly those with
mental impairments, OIG recommended revisiting the purpose of these
payments and the method of determining eligibility for them.  (See
page 36)

* The OIG found that PHS's numerous evaluations of its programs
performed each year provide useful information but do not
necessarily measure program results.  Current PHS systems, with
some reorganization and redirection, could better produce
information to measure performance.  (See page 48)

In order to identify OIG work in the area of performance
measurement, we have labeled some items throughout the semiannual
report as performance measures with the symbol (ruler). 
Performance measures are used to evaluate the achievement of a
program goal, such as the efficiency of an immunization program
which is measured by the number of inoculations provided per dollar
of cost.  In OIG's opinion, the audits, inspections and
investigations identified with the performance measure symbol offer
management information about whether some aspect or all of the
programs or activities reviewed are achieving their missions and
goals.  These proposals are provided to management for their
consideration as they develop their performance measures.

During this reporting period, the following items have been labeled
as performance measures:

Medicare Services Provided to Residents of Skilled Nursing
Facilities Page 12

Oxygen Concentrator Services Page 20

Durable Medical Equipment Billed during Nursing Facility Stays Page
21

Disability Research Demonstration Program Page 34

Initial Disability Claims Page 35

Supplemental Security Income Payments to Children with Mental
Impairments 
     A. Participation of Children with Mental Disabilities in the
     Supplemental Security Income Program Page 36

Supplemental Security Income Payments to Drug Addicts and
Alcoholics
     A. Continued Dependence Page 38
     B. Statutory Requirements Page 39

Hospital Reporting to the National Practitioner Data Bank Page 47

Nationwide Review of Health and Safety Standards at Child Care
Facilities Page 52

Independent Living Program for Foster Care Youths Page 53

Colocated Intergenerational Activities in Departmental Programs
Page 58


