Department of Health and Human Services
Office of Inspector General
Semiannual Report
April 1, 1994 - September 30, 1994

FORWARD

I am pleased to present this semiannual report of the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG)
describing our accomplishments during the 6-month period ending
September 30, 1994.

Since becoming HHS Inspector General almost 1 year ago, I have been
impressed with the breadth of OIG's mission and immensely proud of
its achievements.  The HHS is one of the few Government agencies
that touches all Americans, whether they are Medicare
beneficiaries, patients benefitting from HHS-sponsored biomedical
research, consumers of food or drugs, Head Start children or
recipients of social services.  Even with the imminent
establishment of the Social Security Administration (SSA) as an
independent agency, HHS and its programs will still impact the
lives of most Americans.

Fiscal Year (FY) 1994 has been a time of great challenges.  Our
continuing resource constraints demand that we direct our
activities with great care while streamlining our work force and
expenditures.  This is a challenge all Government agencies are
facing, and we take it ver seriously.

At the same time, FY 1994 has been a year of noteworthy successes. 
Our total savings surpassed $8 billion, which represents $80 in
savings for each dollar invested in OIG and $6.4 million in savings
per OIG employee.  Our accomplishments included a record $379
million settlement of criminal fines, civil damages and penalties
for fraud and kickbacks by a health care corporation; reviews of
the National Institutes of Health's oversight of inventions arising
from extramural research; audits of administrative costs charged to
the Medicare program; and a series of studies of the SSA
representative payee process.

To leverage our limited resources, we continue to coordinate our
activities with a number of outside entities, especially in the
health care area.  Working with the Department of Justice, the
Federal Bureau of investigation and the HHS Office of General
Counsel, we are developing a "voluntary disclosure" program to
offer certain federally-funded health care providers incentives to
disclose any fraud and abuse they discover within their companies. 
We are also embarking on a Federal/State partnership with State
auditors to provide broader audit coverage of significant Medicaid
issues.

In this period of streamlining and fiscal austerity, HHS requires
full use of its resources to successfully carry out its mission. 
The OIG is firmly committed to helping the Department develop the
tools and safeguards to meet its goals efficiently and effectively. 
With the continued dedication of OIG staff, and the cooperation and
support of department managers and the Congress, we look forward to
meeting the challenges that lay ahead.

/s/
June Gibbs Brown
Inspector General

HIGHLIGHTS

In this second half of Fiscal Year 1994, the Office of Inspector
General (OIG) has undertaken several major initiatives to protect
the integrity of departmental operations and programs and the
health and well-being of the beneficiaries served by those
programs.  Some of OIG's most significant accomplishments during
this period are identified below.

Reducing Unnecessary Spending:
- The OIG determined that Medicare paid an estimated $85 million or
more for medical services that should have been paid by a Medicare
contractor's private line of business.  

- The OIG estimated that Medicaid could save as much as $46 million
if therapeutically equivalent generic drugs were used in place of
37 high volume dispensed brand name drugs.  

- In a study of 300 cases of beneficiaries who received physical
therapy services in physicians' offices, OIG found that nearly 4
out of 5 cases did not represent true physical therapy services. 
The OIG concluded that $47 million was inappropriately paid in
1991. 

- The OIG determined that 95 percent of claims for orthotic body
jackets in 1991, $7 million worth, were not legitimate and should
not have been paid to suppliers. 

- The OIG found that the Federal Government has not received credit
from Puerto Rico for its share of $55.2 million in escheated
warrants (uncashed, canceled checks). 

- The OIG determined that California did not credit Federal
programs with their proportionate share, estimated at $111 million,
when excess pension funds were used to pay for State operations.  

Preventing and Detecting Fraud and Abuse:

- As a result of a nationwide project involving OIG investigators,
auditors and attorneys, a major health care firm agreed to a $379
million settlement for paying physicians for referrals to the
firm's psychiatric hospitals. 

- Sixteen persons were sentenced in New York for their part in an
$8 million Medicaid fraud scheme involving medical clinics,
bringing the final number sentenced to 33.  
- An Ohio woman posing as a Medicare representative was sentenced
to 8 to 15 years for burglary.  

- A Texas physician was excluded indefinitely from the Medicare and
State health programs after his license was revoked for abusing two
male patients. 

- A California pharmacist was excluded for 10 years for unlawful
distribution of controlled substances. 

- A heart valve manufacturer agreed to pay $10.75 million for
concealing information during the approval process that the valves
were inclined to fracture. 

- The final 9 of 88 persons involved in accepting kickbacks from a
Georgia chiropractor entered pretrial diversion agreements.  

- A judgment of $21 million was entered against a major durable
medical equipment supplier in Pennsylvania who pled guilty to mail
fraud in a telemarketing scheme. 

- A Louisiana ambulance company agreed to pay $1.86 million to
settle false Medicare claims for transporting patients for
dialysis. 

Identifying Systemic Management Problems:

- The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) is promptly
acting on OIG's recommendations to implement needed payment edits
at Medicare contractors nationwide.  

- The OIG found that accounts payable to the Medicare trust funds
were inconsistently calculated and reported because HCFA's
financial reporting instructions were inadequate.

- The OIG's recommended use of automated peripheral vision testing
devices for assessing disability should not only save Social
Security money, but also eliminate current claimant inconvenience
and reduce assessment delays.

- The OIG found that, as a result of inadequate oversight,  many
extramural research inventions created with National Institutes of
Health money were not being patented in a way that ensured
protection of Federal financial interests. 

- In a report on the Ryan White Comprehensive Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome Resources Emergency Act, OIG presented four
options to the Public Health Service for funding formulas that
could be used to address a number of inequities found in the
program and to target funds to the greatest need.  

Promoting Improved Service Delivery:

- In its annual series of reports on Social Security client
satisfaction, OIG found that overall satisfaction had leveled off
after a few years of decline, that clients were generally satisfied
with service, but that no progress had been made on eight important
service objectives since 1992.  

- The OIG, working with the Administration for Children and
Families (ACF), analyzed shortcomings in both the overall approach
to and the conduct of Federal oversight of State child welfare
programs, and offered several options to improve oversight.  

- The OIG provided options for ACF to consider in improving foster
care eligibility determinations. 

- The OIG suggested opportunities for improvement in the health and
safety practices of child care providers.


Developing and Assessing Performance Measures:

- The OIG determined that HCFA's financial management systems need
improvement to support the preparation of financial statements.  

- A study of the Refugee Matching Grant program found that, while
it allows voluntary agencies and their affiliates to provide a
valuable range of integrated services, its effectiveness measures
are inadequate.  The OIG recommended that the Office of Refugee
Resettlement develop performance indicators to improve the program. 


In order to identify OIG work in the area of performance
measurement, we have labeled some items throughout the semiannual
report as performance measures with the symbol (ruler). 
Performance measures are used to evaluate the achievement of a
program goal, such as the efficiency of an immunization program
which is measured by the number of inoculations provided per dollar
of cost.  In OIG's opinion, the audits, inspections and
investigations identified with the performance measure symbol offer
management information about whether some aspect or all of the
programs or activities reviewed are achieving their missions and
goals.  These proposals are provided to management for their
consideration as they develop their performance measures.

