Department of Health and Human Services
Office of Inspector General
Semiannual Report
October 1, 1993 - March 31, 1994

FORWARD

I am pleased to present my first semiannual report as Inspector
General at the department of Health and Human Services (HHS).  In
my first months at HHS, I have come to appreciate first-hand both
the expanse of the Department's programs and the Office of
Inspector General's (OIG) deserved reputation for excellence in
fulfilling its mission.

The OIG has a responsibility to protect the integrity of HHS
programs and the health and welfare of the beneficiaries of those
programs.  Given the Department's size and scope, this is a broad
mandate.  Outlays for the more than 300 HHS programs are expected
to exceed $632 billion in Fiscal Year 1994, accounting for over one
-third of the budget of the United States.  Moreover, the
Department's programs impact the well-being and quality of life of
virtually every U.S. citizen.

The OIG's impact in dollars alone has been impressive.  Between
1981 and 1993, $57 billion in savings, fines, settlements,
restitutions and receivables resulted from OIG activities and
implementation of our recommendations.  This represents an increase
from $4 saved for every OIG dollar spent in 1981 to $61 saved for
every OIG dollar appropriated in 1993.  Despite dwindling
resources, I am committed to continuing this solid return to the
American taxpayers.

Two of this Administration's top policy initiatives (health care
and welfare reform) will, if enacted, have a profound impact on the
way health care and welfare are financed and delivered, as well as
create new challenges for OIG.  We are working with agency managers
to build in sufficient safeguards and controls to prevent and
detect fraud, waste and abuse and to assure a high quality of
service delivery to the programs' beneficiaries.

In a joint effort with the Department of Justice, we have
established the Executive Level Health Care Fraud Policy Group to
identify important health care fraud initiatives.  Moreover, HHS
OIG is forming partnerships with State auditors and program
evaluators to analyze issues that affect both the Medicare and
Medicaid programs.  We are also working to optimize coordination
with other OIGs, particularly those with responsibilities in the
health care area.

As in Government as a whole, we have begun to streamline our own
operations and management structure to minimize costs and ensure
that the greatest proportion of our resources is concentrated on
the investigations, audits and inspections through which we carry
out our mandate.  We are implementing new review and investigative
methodologies to perform our work.  Along with strategic priority
setting and staff deployment, these measures will assist us in
directing our limited resources to oversee the most critical HHS
issues.

I am proud of the accomplishments of our office, and committed to
meeting ambitions goals for HHS OIG and obtaining meaningful
results.  The resources invested in our office will continue to be
used to the benefit of taxpayers and program beneficiaries.  With
the continued cooperation and support of the Congress, departmental
managers and the Secretary, I look forward to meeting the
challenges ahead.

/s/
June Gibbs Brown
Inspector General

HIGHLIGHTS
In this first half of Fiscal Year 1994, the Office of Inspector
General (OIG) has undertaken several major initiatives to protect
the integrity of departmental operations and programs and the
health and well-being of the beneficiaries served by those
programs.  Some of OIG's most significant accomplishments during
this period are identified below.

Reducing Unnecessary Spending:

- The OIG's work resulted in a $27 million settlement with
Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company stemming from the
company's failure to comply with Medicare secondary payer
requirements. 

- The OIG recommended that California refund $7.6 million and
establish procedures to ensure that the Federal Government is given
full credit for Medicaid third party liability settlements. 

- The OIG found that the Social Security Administration (SSA) did
not stop payments timely for 4,700 disabled beneficiaries who
completed their post trial work periods.  This resulted in SSA
overpaying them $13.7 million, of which it has recovered $4
million.

- The OIG reviewed the training and administrative costs that New
York allocated to Federal programs from April 1, 1988 to March 31,
1991 and identified more equitable allocation methods and an
estimated overcharge of $12.2 million. 
Preventing and Detecting Fraud and Abuse:

- A hospital in Washington, D.C. agreed to pay $2.5 million to
settle charges that it improperly billed Medicare for bills
eventually paid by other sources. 

- In New York, a physical therapist was sentenced to 27 months
incarceration for billing public and private insurers $1 million
for services he did not render.

- A hospital in Kansas agreed to a civil monetary settlement and
publication of advertisements acknowledging its responsibilities to
provide emergency medical treatment to patients regardless of
ability to pay.  The hospital had turned away a woman without
assessing her condition, claiming no physician was available. 

- A New York physician who ran one of the Nation's largest
"Medicaid mills," largely serving substance abusers, was excluded
from the Medicare and all State health care programs for 25 years
after being convicted of submitting false claims costing Medicaid
$1 million.

- A California woman was sentenced to life in prison without
possibility of parole for murdering tenants of her boarding house
for their Supplemental Security Income benefits. 

- A Washington, D.C. woman must pay $196,800 under the Program
Fraud Civil Remedies Act for converting to her own use $13,400 in
benefits mistakenly sent to her deceased mother.

Identifying Systemic Management Problems:

- An OIG study, requested by the Chairman of the Senate Special
Committee on Aging, identified several challenges faced by the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) to the effective management of
NIH's Cooperative Research and Development Agreements program and
made recommendations to ensure its future success. 

- The OIG recommended controls that SSA needs to ensure that
self-employment income transactions are correctly posted to
earnings records. 

- The OIG recommended several actions to ensure that universities
consistently apply Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
requirements regarding recharge centers.  Included were proposals
that the Department work with OMB to ensure that criteria related
to the financial operation of recharge centers are clear, and that
universities conduct self-reviews to strengthen their financial
management of these services. 

- The systems States use to allocate an estimated $20 billion each
year in administrative and indirect costs to Federal programs are
a continuing concern.  The OIG provided input to OMB on this issue
for its revision of Circular A-87, Cost Principles for State and
Local Governments.

Promoting Improved Service Delivery:

- The OIG concluded that SSA needs to develop a strategy for
improving 800 number performance on peak days and improving the
precision of its 800 number access measure. 

- The Public Health Service (PHS) is in the process of implementing
the OIG's recommendations to improve preschool immunizations by
having the Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Bureau capitalize on its
potential to guide and direct State MCH program efforts. 

- An OIG study recommended that PHS and the Health Care Financing
Administration work together to improve coordination between
school-based health centers and managed care providers to promote
better access to quality health care.

- As part of its national review of health and safety standards at
child care facilities that receive Federal funds, OIG, accompanied
by State inspectors, performed unannounced inspections of
facilities in South Carolina.  The OIG found deficiencies similar
to those identified in North Carolina, Wisconsin and Nevada,
including fire code violations, unsanitary conditions, playground
hazards and toxic chemical accessibility. 

Developing and Assessing Performance Measures:

- The OIG issued its opinion on SSA's financial statements for the
seventh year and again reported that SSA has been improperly using
Internal Revenue Service records as the basis for transferring
employment tax revenues to the Social Security trust funds. 

- The OIG found that, despite some problems and complaints that
merited attention from program managers, a majority of participants
in the Job Opportunities and Basic Skills program gave high ratings
overall to the program, its activities and support services.

In order to identify OIG work in the area of performance
measurement, we have labeled some items throughout the semiannual
report as performance measures with the symbol (ruler). 
Performance measures are used to evaluate the achievement of a
program goal, such as the efficiency of an immunization program
which is measured by the number of inoculations provided per dollar
of cost.  In OIG's opinion, the audits, inspections and
investigations identified with the performance measure symbol offer
management information about whether some aspect or all of the
programs or activities reviewed are achieving their missions and
goals.  These proposals are provided to management for their
consideration as they develop their performance measures.


